Imagine Pericles arrivedat Tyre,
Welcomed and settled tohis own desire.
His woeful queen we leaveat Ephesus,
Unto Diana there avotaress.
Now to Marina bend yourmind,
Whom our fast-growingscene must find
At Tarsus, and by Cleontrain'd
In music, letters; whohath gain'd
Of education all thegrace,
Which makes her both the heartand place of general wonder.
But, alack, That monsterenvy, oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marina'slife
Seeks to take off bytreason's knife.
And in this kind ourCleon hath one daughter,
and a wench full grown,
Even ripe for marriage-rite;this maid hight Philoten:
and it is said forcertain in our story,
she would ever with Marina be:
Be't when she weaved thesleided silk
With fingers long, small,white as milk;
Or when she would withsharp needle wound
The cambric, which shemade more sound
By hurting it; or when tothe lute
She sung, and made thenight-bird mute,
That still records with moan;
or when She would withrich and constant pen
Vail to her mistress Dian;
Still, this Philotencontends in skill
With absolute Marina:
so with the dove ofPaphos might the crow
Vie feathers white.Marina gets all praises,
which are paid as debts,
And not as given. This sodarks
In Philoten all gracefulmarks,
That Cleon's wife, withenvy rare,
A present murderer doesprepare for good Marina,
that her daughter might standpeerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vilethoughts to stead,
Lychorida, our nurse, isdead:
And cursed Dionyza hath
The pregnant instrument ofwrath prest for this blow.
The unborn event
I do commend to yourcontent:
Only I carry winged time
Post on the lame feet ofmy rhyme;
Which never could I soconvey,
Unless your thoughts wenton my way.
Dionyza does appear,
With Leonine, a murderer.
Thy oath remember; thouhast sworn to do't:
'Tis but a blow, whichnever shall be known.
Thou canst not do a thingin the world so soon,
To yield thee so muchprofit. Let not conscience,
Which is but cold, nor flaminglove thy bosom enslaved
too nicely; nor let pity,
which even women havecast off, melt thee,
but be a soldierto thy purpose.
I will do't; but yet sheis a goodly creature.
The fitter, then, thegods should have her.
Here she comes weeping forher only nurses' death.
Thou art resolved?
I am resolved.
No, I will rob Tellus ofher weed,
To strew thy greenwith flowers:
the yellows, blues, the purpleviolets, and marigolds,
Shall as a carpet hangupon thy grave,
While summer-days do last.Ay me! poor maid,
Born in a tempest, when mymother died,
This world to me is like alasting storm,
Whirring me from myfriends.
How now, Marina! why doyou keep alone?
How chance my daughteris not with you?
Do not consume yourblood with sorrowing:
What, have you a nurse of me.Lord, how your favour's changed
With this unprofitablewoe!
Come, give me yourflowers, On the sea march'nt.
Walk with Leonine; the airis quick there,
And it pierces andsharpens the stomach.
Come Leonine, take her bythe arm, walk with her.
No, I pray you;
I'll not bereave you ofyour servant.
Come, come;
I love the king yourfather, and yourself,
With more than foreignheart. We every day
Expect him here: when heshall come and see
Our paragon to all reportsthus blasted,
He will repent the breadthof his great voyage;
Blame both my lord and me,that we have taken
No care to your bestcourses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerfulonce again;
reserve that excellentcomplexion, which did steal
The eyes of young andold. Care not for me
I can go home alone.
Well, I will go;
But yet I have no desireto it.
Come, come, I know 'tisgood for you.
Walk half an hour,Leonine, at the least:
Remember what I have said.
I warrant you, madam.
I'll leave you, my sweetlady, for a while:
Pray, walk softly, do notheat your blood:
What! I must have careof you.
My thanks, sweet madam.
Is this wind westerly thatblows?
South-west.
When I was born, the windwas north.
Was't so?
My father, as nurse said,did never fear,
But cried 'Good seaman!'to the sailors, galling
His kingly hands, halingropes;
And, clasping to the mast,endured a sea
That almost burst thedeck.
When was this?
When I was born:
Never was wind nor wavesmore violent;
And from the ladder-tacklewashes off a canvas-climber.
'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?'
And with a droppingindustry they skip
From stem to stern: theboatswain whistles,
and the master calls, andtrebles their confusion.
Come, say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a littlespace for prayer,
I grant it: pray; but benot tedious,
For the gods are quick ofear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my lady.
Why would she have mekill'd?
Now, as I can remember, bymy troth,
I never did her hurt inall my life:
I never spake bad word,nor did ill turn
To any living creature:believe me, la,
I never kill'd a mouse,nor hurt a fly:
I trod upon a worm againstmy will,
But I wept for it. Howhave I offended,
Wherein my death mightyield her any profit,
Or my life imply her anydanger?
My commission Is not to reasonof the deed, but do it.
You will not do't for allthe world, I hope.
You are well favour'd, andyour looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. Isaw you lately,
When you caught hurt inparting two that fought:
Good sooth, it show'd wellin you: do so now:
Your lady seeks my life;come you between,
And save poor me, theweaker.
I am sworn,
And will dispatch.
Hold, villain!
A prize! a prize!
Half-part, mates,half-part.
Come, let's have heraboard suddenly.
These roguing thieves servethe great pirate Valdes;
And they have seizedMarina. Let her go:
There's no hopeshe will return.
I'll swear she's dead,
And thrown into the sea.But I'll see further:
Perhaps they will butplease themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. Ifshe remain,
Whom they have ravish'dmust by me be slain.
Boult!
Sir?
Search the market narrowly;Mytilene is full of gallants.
We lost too much money thismart by being too wenchless.
We were never so muchout of creatures.
We have but poor three,
and they can do no morethan they can do;
and they with continual actionare even as good as rotten.
Therefore let's have fresh ones,whate'er we pay for them.
If there be not a conscienceto be used in every trade,
we shall never prosper.
Thou sayest true: 'tis not ourbringing up of poor bastards,
--as, I think, I havebrought up some eleven--
Ay, to eleven; andbrought them down again.
But shall I search the market?
What else, man? The stuffwe have, a strong wind
will blow it to pieces, theyare so pitifully sodden.
Thou sayest true; they're toounwholesome, o' conscience.
The poor Transylvanian is dead,
that lay with thelittle baggage.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; shemade him roast-meat for worms.
But I'll go search the market.
Three or four thousandchequins were as pretty a
proportion to livequietly, and so give over.
Why to give over, I prayyou? is it a shame to get
when we are old?
O, our credit comes notin like the commodity,
nor the commodity wagesnot with the danger:
therefore, if in ouryouths we could pick up
some pretty estate, 'twere notamiss to keep our door hatched.
Besides, the sore terms westand upon with the gods
will be strong with us forgiving over.
Come, other sorts offendas well as we.
As well as we! ay, andbetter too; we offend worse.
Neither is ourprofession any trade;
it's no calling. Buthere comes Boult.
Come your ways. My masters,you say she's a virgin?
O, sir, we doubt it not.
Master, I have gone throughfor this piece, you see:
if you like her, so; if not,I have lost my earnest.
Boult, has she anyqualities?
She has a goodface, speaks well,
and has excellent good clothes:there's no further necessity
of qualities can makeher be refused.
What's her price, Boult?
I cannot be bated one doitof a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me, my masters,
you shall have yourmoney presently.
Wife, take her in; instructher what she has to do,
that she may not be rawin her entertainment.
Boult, take you the marks ofher, the colour of her hair,
complexion, height, age, withwarrant of her virginity;
and cry 'He that willgive most shall
have her first.' Such amaidenhead were no cheap thing,
if men were as they have been.
Get this done as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Alack that Leonine was soslack, so slow!
He should have struck, notspoke; or that these pirates,
Not enough barbarous, hadnot o'erboard thrown me
For to seek my mother!
Why lament you, prettyone?
That I am pretty.
Come, the gods have donetheir part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands,where you are like to live.
The more my faultTo scape his hands
where I was like to die.
Ay, and you shall live inpleasure.
No.
Yes, indeed shall you, and tastegentlemen of all fashions:
you shall fare well;you shall have the
difference of all complexions.What! do you stop your ears?
Are you a woman?
What would you have me be,an I be not a woman?
An honest woman, or not awoman.
Marry, whip thee, gosling:I think I shall have
something to do with you. Come,you're a young foolish sapling,
and must be bowed asI would have you.
The gods defend me!
If it please the godsto defend you by men,
then men must comfortyou, men must feed you,
men to stir you up.
Boult's returned.
How now, sir, hast thou criedher through the market?
I have cried her almost tothe number of her hairs;
I have drawn her picturewith my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dostthou find the inclination
of the people, especiallyof the younger sort?
'Faith, they listened tome as they would have
hearkened to theirfather's testament.
There was a Spaniard'smouth so watered,
that he went to bed toher very description.
We shall have himhere to-morrow
with his best ruff on.
To-night, to-night.But, mistress,
Do you know the French knightthat cowers i' the hams?
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
Ay, he: he offered to cut acaper at the proclamation;
but he made a groanat it, and swore
he would see herto-morrow.
Well, well; as for him, hebrought his disease hither:
here he does but repair it.
I know he will comein our shadow,
to scatter hiscrowns in the sun.
Well, if we had of everynation a traveller,
we should lodge themwith this sign.
Pray you, come hither awhile.
You have fortunes comingupon you. Mark me:
you must seem todo that fearfully
which you commit willingly,
despise profit whereyou have most gain.
To weep that you live as ye domakes pity in your lovers:
seldom but that pity begetsyou a good opinion,
and that opinion a mereprofit. I understand you not.
O, take her home,mistress, take her home:
these blushes of hersmust be quenched
with some present practise.
Thou sayest true, i'faith;
for your bride goesto that with shame
which is her way togo with warrant.
'Faith, some do, and somedo not. But, mistress,
if I have bargainedfor the joint,--
Thou mayst cut a morseloff the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it? Come,young one, I like the
manner of your garmentswell.
Ay, by my faith, theyshall not be changed yet.
Boult, spend thou that inthe town: report what a
sojourner we have; you'lllose nothing by custom.
When nature flamed this piece,
she meant thee a good turn;
therefore say whata paragon she is,
and thou hast the harvestout of thine own report.
I warrant you, mistress,thunder shall not so awake
the beds of eels as mygiving out her beauty
stir up the lewdly-inclined.I'll bring home some to-night.
Come your ways; follow me.
If fires be hot, knivessharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virginknot will keep.
Diana, aid my purpose!
What have we to do with Diana?
Pray you, will you go with us?
Why, are you foolish? Canit be undone?
O Dionyza, such a piece ofslaughter
The sun and moon ne'erlook'd upon!
I think you'll turna child again.
Were I chief lord of allthis spacious world,
I'ld give it to undo thedeed. O lady,
Much less in blood thanvirtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crowno' the earth
I' the justice of compare!O villain Leonine!
Whom thou hast poison'dtoo:
If thou hadst drunk to him,'t had been a kindness
Becoming well thy fact:what canst thou say
When noble Pericles shalldemand his child?
That she is dead. Nursesare not the fates,
To foster it, nor ever topreserve.
She died at night; I'llsay so. Who can cross it?
Unless you play the piousinnocent,
And for an honestattribute cry out
'She died by foul play.'
O, go to. Well, well,
Of all the faultsbeneath the heavens,
The gods do like this worst.
Be one of those that think
The petty wrens of Tarsuswill fly hence,
And open this to Pericles.
I shame to think of whata noble strain you are,
And of how coward aspirit.
To such proceeding
Who ever but hisapprobation gave,
And not his prime consent,
he did not flow fromhonourable sources.
Be it so, then:
Yet none does know, butyou, how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leoninebeing gone.
She did disdain my child,and stood between
Her and her fortunes: nonewould look on her,
But cast their gazes onMarina's face;
Whilst ours was blurted atand held a malkin
Not worth the time of day.It pierced me through;
And though you call mycourse unnatural,
You not your child wellloving, yet I find
It greets me as anenterprise of kindness
Perform'd to your soledaughter.
Heavens forgive it!
And as for Pericles,
What should he say? Wewept after her hearse,
And yet we mourn: hermonument
Is almost finish'd, andher epitaphs
In glittering goldencharacters express
A general praise to her,and care in us
At whose expense 'tisdone.
Thou art like the harpy,
Which, to betray, dost,with thine angel's face,
Seize with thine eagle'stalons.
You are like one thatsuperstitiously
Do swear to the gods thatwinter kills the flies:
But yet I know you'll doas I advise.
Thus time we waste, andlong leagues make short;
Sail seas in cockles, havean wish but for't;
Making, to take yourimagination,
From bourn to bourn,region to region.
Where our scenes seem tolive. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who standi' the gaps to teach you,
The stages of our story.
Pericles is now againthwarting the wayward seas,
Attended on by many a lordand knight.
To see his daughter, allhis life's delight.
Old Helicanus goes along.
Behind is left to govern, if you bear in mind,
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time togreat and high estate,
Well-sailing ships andbounteous winds have brought
This king to Tarsus,--thinkhis pilot thought;
So with his steerage shallyour thoughts grow on,--
To fetch his daughterhome, who first is gone.
Like motes and shadows seethem move awhile;
Your ears unto your eyesI'll reconcile.
See how belief may sufferby foul show!
This borrow'd passionstands for true old woe;
And Pericles, in sorrowall devour'd,
With sighs shot through, andbiggest tears o'ershower'd,
Leaves Tarsus and againembarks. He swears
Never to wash his face,nor cut his hairs:
He puts on sackcloth, andto sea. He bears
A tempest, which hismortal vessel tears,
And yet he rides it out.Now please you wit.
The epitaph is for Marinawrit by wicked Dionyza.
'The fairest, sweet'st,and best lies here,
Who wither'd in her springof year.
She was of Tyrus theking's daughter,
On whom foul death hathmade this slaughter;
Marina was she call'd; andat her birth,
The sea, being proud, swallow'dsome part o' the earth:
Therefore the earth,fearing to be o'erflow'd,
Hath The seas' birth-childon the heavens bestow'd:
Wherefore she does, andswears she'll never stint,
Make raging battery uponshores of flint.'
No visor does become blackvillany
So well as soft and tenderflattery.
Let Pericles believe hisdaughter's dead,
And bear his courses to beordered
By Lady Fortune; while ourscene must play
His daughter's woe andheavy well-a-day
In her unholy service.Patience, then,
And think you now are allin Mytilene.
Did you ever hear thelike?
No, nor never shall do insuch a place as this,
she being once gone.
But to have divinitypreached there!
did you ever dreamof such a thing?
No, no. Come, I am for nomore bawdy-houses:
shall's go hear thevestals sing?
I'll do any thing nowthat is virtuous;
but I am out of the roadof rutting for ever.
Well, I had rather thantwice the worth of her she
had ne'er come here.
Fie, fie upon her! she'sable to freeze the god
Priapus, and undo awhole generation.
We must either get herravished, or be rid of her.
When she should do for clientsher fitment, and do me the
kindness of our profession,she has me her quirks,
her reasons, her master reasons,her prayers, her knees;
she would make apuritan of the devil,
if he should cheapen akiss of her.
'Faith, I must ravish her,or she'll disfurnish us
of all our cavaliers, andmake our swearers priests.
Now, the pox upon hergreen-sickness for me!
'Faith, there's noway to be rid on't
but by the way to the pox.
Here comes the LordLysimachus disguised.
How now! How a dozen ofvirginities?
Now, the gods to-blessyour honour!
I am glad to see yourhonour in good health.
You may so; 'tis thewell for you that your
resorters stand upon soundlegs. How now!
wholesome iniquity haveyou that a man may deal
withal, and defy thesurgeon?
We have here one, sir, ifshe would--but there never
came her like in Mytilene.
If she'ld but do thedeed of darkness,
thou wouldst say. Your honourknows what 'tis to say
well enough. Well, callforth, call forth.
For flesh and blood, sir,white and red, you shall
see a rose; and she were arose indeed, if she had but--
What, prithee?
O, sir, I can be modest.
That dignifies the renownof a bawd, no less than it
gives a good report to anumber to be chaste.
Here comes that whichgrows to the stalk;
never plucked yet,I can assure you.
Is she not a faircreature?
'Faith, she would serveafter a long voyage at sea.
Well, here's for you:leave us.
I beseech your honour,give me leave: a word, and
I'll have done presently.
I beseech you, do.
First, I would have you note,
this is an honourable man.
I desire to find him so, thatI may worthily note him.
Next, he's the governorof this country,
and a man whom I am bound to.
If he govern the country, youare bound to him indeed;
but how honourable he isin that, I know not.
Pray you, without anymore virginal fencing,
will you use him kindly? He willline your apron with gold.
What he will do graciously,I will thankfully receive.
Ha' you done?
My lord, she's not pacedyet: you must take some
pains to work her to yourmanage. Come, we will
leave his honour and hertogether. Go thy ways.
Now, pretty one, how longhave you been at this trade?
What trade, sir?
Why, I cannot name't but Ishall offend.
I cannot be offended with mytrade. Please you to name it.
How long have you been ofthis profession?
E'er since I can remember.
Did you go to 't so young?Were you a gamester at
five or at seven?
Earlier too, sir, if now Ibe one.
Why, the house you dwellin proclaims you to be a
creature of sale.
Do you know this house tobe a place of such resort,
and will come into 't? Ihear say you are of
honourable parts, and arethe governor of this place.
Why, hath your principal madeknown unto you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your herb-woman; shethat sets seeds and roots
of shame and iniquity. O,you have heard something
of my power, and so standaloof for more serious
wooing. But I protestto thee, pretty one,
my authority shall not seethee, or else look friendly
upon thee. Come, bring meto some private place:
come, come.
If you were born tohonour, show it now;
If put upon you, make thejudgment good
That thought you worthy ofit.
How's this? how's this?Some more; be sage.
What reason is therein your justice
which hath power over all toundo any?
Take you mine honour and youmake a gap into fobidden ground
Where after all may tread.If then with violence
you mar this workmanshipof heaven
you will abuse yourjustice, kill you honour
and leave me impoverishedto the world.
Why this same housewherein thou live'st
is a receptacle ofall men's sins.
A nurse of wickedness. Howcan'st thou be anything
but naught that dwells within?
Know you the roof butstill will enter here?
Oh my good lord, ifthere be fire before me
must I straightway run to burnmyself
or suppose this house,which two too many
feels such houses are shouldbe the doctor's patromony
and the surgeons feeding,follows it that I must needs
infect myself to maintain them.
My yet good lord,make me your servant
and I will obey you.Let me live honest
and I am content. Honest.
How now, even in thisminute let me die.
O, that the gods
Would set me free fromthis unhallow'd place,
Though they did change meto the meanest bird
That flies i' the purerair!
Now surely this is virtue'simage rather virtue's self.
Come down from heavenawhile to reign on earth
to teach us what we should be.
I did not think thou couldsthave spoke so well;
ne'er dream'd thou couldst.
I hither came with thoughtsintemperate, foul and deformed.
The which your tears havewashed, till they are white.
Your speech has mended mycorrupted mind.
Hold, here's gold for thee:
Persever in that clear waythou goest,
And the gods strengthenthee!
The good gods preserveyou!
Lady, to me the very doors andwindows savour vilely.
Fare thee well. Thouart a piece of virtue,
and I doubt not but thytraining hath been noble.
Hold, here's more gold forthee.
A curse upon him, die helike a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness!
If thou dost hear from me,it shall be for thy good.
I beseech your honour, onepiece for me.
Avaunt, thou damneddoor-keeper!
Your house, but for thisvirgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelmyou. Away!
How's this? We must takeanother course with you.
If your peevish chastity,which is not worth a
breakfast in the cheapestcountry under the cope,
shall undo a whole household,let me be gelded like
a spaniel. Come your ways.
Whither would you have me?
How now! what's thematter?
Worse and worse, mistress;she has here spoken holy
words to the LordLysimachus.
O abominable!
She makes our professionas it were to stink afore
the face of the gods.
Marry, hang her up forever!
The nobleman would havedealt with her like a
nobleman, and she sent himaway as cold as a snowball;
saying his prayers too.
Boult, take her away; useher at thy pleasure:
crack the glass ofher virginity,
and make the rest malleable.
An if she were thornierground than she is,
she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark, you gods!
She conjures: away withher! Would she had never
come within my doors!Marry, hang you!
She's born to undo us. Will younot go the way of women-kind?
Marry, come up, mydish of chastity
with rosemary and bays!
Come, mistress; I must haveyour maiden head taken off
or the common hangmanshall execute it.
Come your ways. We'll have nomore gentlemen driven away.
Come your ways, I say!
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the jewelyou hold so dear.
Prithee, tell me one thingfirst.
Come now, your one thing.
Who does thou think thineenemy to be?
Why, I could wish him to be mymaster, or rather, my mistress.
Neither of these are sobad as thou art,
Since they do better theein their command.
Thou hold'st a place, forwhich the pained'st fiend
Of hell would not inreputation change:
Thou art the damneddoorkeeper to every
Coistrel that comesinquiring for his Tib;
To the choleric fisting ofevery rogue
Thy ear is liable; thyfood is such
As hath been belch'd on byinfected lungs.
What would you have me do?go to the wars, would you?
Where a man may serveseven years for the loss
of a leg, and havenot money enough
to buy him a wooden one?
Do any thing butthis thou doest.
Empty old receptacles, orcommon shores, of filth;
Serve by indenture to thecommon hangman:
Any of these ways are yetbetter than this;
For what thou professest,a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear.O, that the gods
Would safely deliver mefrom this place!
Here, here's gold forthee.
If that thy master wouldgain by thee,
Proclaim that I can sing,weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues, whichI'll keep from boast:
And I will undertake allthese to teach.
I doubt not but thispopulous city will
Yield many scholars.
But can you teach all thisyou speak of?
Prove that I cannot, takeme home again,
And prostitute me to thebasest groom
That doth frequent yourhouse.
Well, I will see whatI can do for thee:
if I can place thee, I will.
But amongst honest women.
'Faith, my acquaintancelies little amongst them.
But since my master andmistress have bought you,
there's no going butby their consent:
therefore I will make themacquainted with your purpose,
and I doubt not but I shallfind them tractable enough.
Come, I'll do for thee whatI can; come your ways.